CHAPTER
9
Preferential
Trade Agreements
and the Global
Trade Regime
The major trading nations supported multilateral trade liberalization
when they signed the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
in 1947, but a number of preferential trade agreements (PTAs) were
also created. PTAs can be defined as trade agreements among a limited group
of countries that provide trade preferences to the members. Most PTAs ori-
ginally included countries within a particular region, such as the European
Community and the Central American Common Market. However, about
one half of PTAs in force today are transregional agreements that involve
connections among regions and transcend regional boundaries.1 To include
transregional as well as regional trade agreements we use the term PTAs, even
though the WTO and some authors use the term regional trade agreements
(RTAs) when referring to all of these agreements. Mainly because of the
growing diversity of WTO members and the inability to conclude the WTO
Doha Round agreement, the value of intra- PTA trade increased from about
28 percent of world trade in 1990 to 50 percent in 2008.2 The first part of this
chapter examines why PTAs are formed and how they affect the global trade
regime; the second part focuses on some specific PTAs. One difference between
transregional and regional PTAs is that some regional PTAs, such as the EU
and Mercosur in South America, are at higher levels of integration. The stages
or levels of integration include the following (see Figure 9.1):
1 Free trade area (FTA). Member states eliminate tariffs and other
restrictions on substantially all trade with one another, but each member
can retain its own trade policies toward non-m ember states. Thus, an
FTA poses less of a threat to national sovereignty and is more acceptable
to states with politically sensitive relationships. More than 90 percent of
PTAs are FTAs. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
263

264 III THE ISSUE AREAS
Free trade Customs Common Economic Political
area (FTA) union (CU) market union union
Removal of tariffs
X X X X X
among members
Common external tariff X X X X
Free movement of
X X X
labor and capital
Harmonized
X X
economic policies
Political unification X
FIGURE 9.1
Stages of Regional Economic Integration
and the free trade agreement of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) are examples.
2 Customs union (CU). A CU has the characteristics of an FTA plus
a common external tariff (CET) toward outside states. A CU has
institutions to administer the CET, and the members have less ability to
make independent decisions. When six states (France, West Germany,
Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg) formed the European
Community (EC) as a CU in 1957, the UK was not included because it
wanted to retain its Commonwealth preference system. To join the EC, the
UK would have to raise its tariffs with Commonwealth countries to the
same levels as the CET. Instead, the UK formed the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) with Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Sweden,
and Switzerland in 1960 and retained its Commonwealth preferences.
However, the UK’s trade with EC members gradually increased, and in
1973 it joined the EC and phased out its Commonwealth preferences.
There are only a small number of CUs, and the European Union (EU) is
the most important of them. (We use the term EC from 1957 to 1992, and
EU after 1992 to reflect the name change in 1993.)
3 Common market. A common market has the characteristics of a CU
plus the free mobility of factors of production (labor and capital) among
members. The increased labor mobility induces members to establish
similar health, safety, educational, and social security standards so that
no country’s workers have a competitive advantage. Successful common
markets are rare because they require high levels of integration; the EU is
a common market.
4 Economic union. An economic union has the characteristics of a common
market, and it harmonizes members’ industrial, regional, transport, fiscal,
and monetary policies. A full economic union includes a monetary union
with a common currency. As discussed, 19 of the 28 EU members have
adopted the euro as their common currency.
5 Political union. A political union has the characteristics of an economic
union and also harmonizes members’ foreign and defense policies. A fully

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 265
developed political union is more like a federal political system than an
agreement among sovereign states.
It is important to note that these stages of integration are models that
do not fully describe reality. NAFTA, for example, is an FTA (stage 1); but
its provisions also require more openness toward foreign investment identi-
fied with stage 3 (a common market). Furthermore, some PTAs in the South
described as CUs and common markets have not actually reached those levels.
Although these stages are only models, they provide general guidance to the
process by which states become more integrated.
PTAS AND THE GPE THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
In some cases WTO multilateralism and PTAs are competing approaches
to trade. Whereas multilateralism contributes to global trade liberalization,
PTAs may divide the world into competing trade blocs. However, open PTAs
can break down national trade barriers and serve as a stepping stone rather
than an obstacle to global free trade. PTAs following open principles abolish
barriers on substantially all trade among members and lower trade barriers to
outsiders. MNCs often use open regionalism and multilateralism as comple-
mentary strategies to promote market forces and increase their competitive-
ness in the global economy.
Liberal economists see multilateralism as the best route to freer trade
because it breaks down preferential as well as national trade barriers. Some
liberals who are highly committed to multilateralism focus on “the damage”
PTAs “impose on the multilateral trading system.”3 For example, they view
the recent trend toward forming numerous bilateral FTAs as producing over-
lapping FTAs that undermine “transparency and predictability in international
trade relations.”4 Other liberals take a more nuanced approach. They consider
closed PTAs as a threat to global free trade, but they support open PTAs as
a “second- best” route to trade liberalization when global trade negotiations
fail. Although they acknowledge that open PTAs may harm some groups such
as displaced workers, they believe that the efficiency gains outweigh the costs
incurred. They do not view power disparities as a problem for smaller states in
PTAs because they assume that all states benefit from open PTAs. Indeed, they
argue that small states benefit more than large states because of economies of
scale and increased demand for their exports. Neomercantilists and Marxists
by contrast believe that PTAs have important distributional effects, with some
states benefiting at the expense of others. Neomercantilists argue that larger
PTA members expect “side payments” from smaller members that exceed any
economic benefits the smaller members receive from gains in market access and
economies of scale. For example, Canada and Mexico sought free trade with the
United States to gain more assured access to the large U.S. market. The United
States, however, expected side payments in foreign investment, services trade,
and access to natural resources—e specially energy.5 Thus, neomercantilists
expect the distribution of benefits in PTAs to reflect the asymmetries of power,

266 III THE ISSUE AREAS
wealth, and technology among member states. Marxists see MNCs and trans-
national capital as the main beneficiaries of PTAs, and the working class and
poorest states as the main losers. MNCs locate their production in states with
the lowest wages, environmental standards, and taxes and export freely to
other states in the PTA.
PTAS AND GLOBALIZATION
As discussed, the WTO uses the term regional trade agreements for transregional
or cross- regional agreements as well as regional agreements. For example, the
EU has bilateral FTAs with Mexico, Chile, and South Africa; and the United
States has bilateral FTAs with Singapore, Chile, Israel, and Jordan. We there-
fore use the term preferential trade agreements because it better captures these
agreements among states in different geographic regions.
In some respects, globalization is necessary to deal with current world
problems. As interdependence increases, financial crises, trade wars, and envir-
onmental degradation require management at the global level. The WTO, IMF,
and World Bank are better equipped than preferential agreements to deal with
these problems. Globalization also promotes linkages among states in different
PTAs, and in this sense it can undermine PTA cohesiveness. However, global-
ization may also stimulate the growth of PTAs. States often rely on institutions
above the national level to deal with global interdependence issues, but IOs
with large, diverse memberships may be unable to identify common interests
and sanction defectors.6 Thus, PTAs composed of like-m inded states may be
more effective than larger multilateral institutions in dealing with cross- national
problems. Globalization also contributes to increased competition, and states
and MNCs can often improve their global competitiveness by organizing
regionally or transregionally. For example, European MNCs have improved
their global competitiveness by using the EU as a regional platform, and U.S.
MNCs have benefited from the existence of NAFTA. Furthermore, globaliza-
tion is associated with neoliberalism, which favors a shift in authority from the
state to the market. Market pressures weaken state barriers and contribute to
the growth of private and public linkages at both the PTA and global levels.
Thus, PTAs and globalization can be both conflictual and complementary.7
A HISTORICAL OVERVIEW OF PTAS
Trade regionalism and transregionalism extend back to ancient times. The
Roman Empire fostered trade transregionalism from the first to fifth centuries
CE, and the spread of Roman law and Latin in major outposts provided sta-
bility for this trade. Thus, Egypt imported metals, wine, and olive oil from Italy
and other parts of Europe, and exported grain and flax. British Imperialism also
used transregional trade. When Great Britain imposed a 10 percent tariff on
most imports in response to the Great Depression, it adopted an imperial pref-
erence system with the dominions at a 1932 Ottawa conference. This formed
the basis for the British Commonwealth preference system as decolonization

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 267
proceeded.8 Examples of early regional integration efforts were an 1826 CU
between England and Ireland; an 1833 treaty establishing a Zollverein or CU
among German states; and an 1854 Canada– U.S. Reciprocity Treaty removing
all tariffs on natural products. Examples in the South included a 1910 South
African Customs Union among the Union of South Africa, Bechuanaland,
Basutoland, and Swaziland; and a 1917 CU among the British colonies of
Kenya, Uganda, and Tanganyika.9 Regional integration in its modern form
developed after World War II with the creation of the EC. This chapter deals
with the two major waves of PTAs during the postwar period.
The First Wave of PTAs
In 1949 the Soviet Union signed a treaty with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, Poland, and Romania establishing the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance (CMEA). Although CMEA members engaged in technical cooper-
ation and joint planning, state-c entered central planning precluded any moves
toward regional economic integration.10 Thus, most writers view the first
wave of PTAs as beginning with the formation of the EC in 1957 and EFTA
in 1960.11 PTAs then spread to Latin America and Africa during the 1960s.
However, PTAs in the South were designed mainly to provide larger markets
and economies of scale for LDC production of industrial goods through import
substitution policies. The first wave of PTAs was largely unsuccessful outside
Europe, because the South’s attempts to promote import substitution at the
regional level led to numerous problems. Only a limited number of indus-
tries were willing to locate in Southern PTAs, and they were concentrated in
the larger, more advanced LDCs. This unequal distribution of benefits led to
disputes among member states; in the East African Common Services Union,
for example, Tanzania and Uganda were resentful that most industries located
in Kenya. Some Southern PTAs tried to allocate industries among members by
bureaucratic means, but this led to economic inefficiencies and further conflict.
PTAs in the first wave (the 1950s to 1960s) also had some other
characteristics. First, all PTA members were from the same geographic region.
Second, the PTAs were plurilateral rather than bilateral; that is, they were
formed among at least three states. Third, the PTAs were either among DCs
(North– North) or among LDCs (South– South). For example, six European
states formed the EC, and four Central American states formed the Central
American Common Market. Fourth, the United States as global hegemon
firmly supported multilateral trade, generally opposed PTAs, and would not
join them. The United States made an exception in supporting the EC to pro-
mote an economically strong Western Europe in the Cold War struggle with
the Soviet Union.12
The Second Wave of PTAs
The second wave of PTAs, which began in the 1980s, is much more widespread
and durable than the first wave. The most notable part of the second wave has

268 III THE ISSUE AREAS
been the proliferation of PTAs since the creation of the WTO. GATT/W TO
members are to notify the organization of all PTAs in which they participate.
Notifications refer to both the creation of new PTAs and the accession of new
states to a PTA (e.g., the 2007 accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU).
From 1948 to 1994 the GATT received 124 notifications of PTAs covering
trade in goods, and from 1995 to 2015 the WTO received over 400 additional
notifications of PTAs covering trade in goods or services.13 Furthermore,
a number of PTAs today have not been notified to the WTO.14 Many states
view PTAs as the centerpiece of their commercial policy, and for some WTO
members preferential trade now accounts for more than 90 percent of their
total trade.15 A second notable feature of the second wave is that many of the
PTAs are transregional; for example, Chile has a number of transregional bilat-
eral trade agreements.
What accounts for the importance of the second wave? First, the EU has
broadened and deepened the integration process. Table 9.1 shows that there
were 28 EU members in 2015; 19 of these members (with an asterisk *) have
adopted the euro as a common currency. Second, the United States reversed
its policy and has formed FTAs with a growing number of countries. Third,
NAFTA was the first reciprocal PTA between DCs (the United States and
Canada) and an LDC (Mexico). This marked a change from the PTAs in the
first wave which were only North– North or South– South. Fourth, the second
wave is marked by a proliferation of bilateral PTAs, unlike the plurilateral
PTAs of the first wave. Fifth, LDCs are joining in a growing number of PTAs,
which are no longer based on import substitution policies and are more open to
global market forces. Finally, there are attempts to form larger cross- regional
PTAs such as the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans- Pacific
Partnership (CPTPP).16
EXPLANATIONS FOR THE RISE OF REGIONAL
INTEGRATION
As discussed, transregional PTAs generally do not lead to integration about
the FTA level. We therefore focus our discussion of integration mainly on the
regional level. Neomercantilists, liberals, and Marxists emphasize different
factors in explaining the rise of regional integration. Whereas neomercantilists
look to security and power relationships, liberals focus on the growth of inter-
dependence, and Marxists emphasize the role of transnational capital.
Neomercantilist Explanations
Some neomercantilists see regional integration as a response to security and
power relationships. For example, the U.S.– Soviet bipolar system after World
War II helped spark European integration for several reasons. First, most
EC members were also members of the NATO alliance, and “tariff cuts are
more likely between allies than between states belonging to different military

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 269
TABLE 9.1
Expanding Membership of the European Union
GDP GDP per Capita
Member Population (PPP) % as % of EU
Year Members % Added Addition Average
1957 France*, West Germany, 100 N/ A 100
Italy*, Belgium*,
Netherlands*, Luxembourg*
1973 United Kingdom, Denmark, 33.4 31.9 96.4
Ireland*
1981 Greece* 3.7 1.8 48.4
1986 Spain*, Portugal* 17.8 11 62.2
1990 Germany unified* 5.9 3.8
1995 Austria*, Finland*, Sweden 6.3 6.5 103.5
2004 Cyprus*, Czech Republic, 19.6 8.9 45.4
Estonia*, Hungary, Latvia*,
Lithuania*, Malta*, Poland,
Slovakia*, Slovenia*
2007 Bulgaria, Romania 6.5 2 17.7
2013 Croatia 0.8 0.7 38.8
Notes: * = eurozone members
Sources: The World Bank— GDP per Capita (current US$).
Eurostat— Tables, Graphs, and Maps— Population by Country by year 2003– 2014.
http:// data.worldbank.org/ indicator/ Ny.GDP.PCAP.CD/ countries?page=1
http:// ec.europa.eu/ eurostat/ tgm/ refreshTableAction.do?tab=table&plugin=1
&pcode=tps00001&language=en
coalitions.”17 Second, the U.S. and Soviet superpowers assumed the main
security responsibilities under the bipolar system, and this enabled Western
Europe to focus on regional economic integration.18 Third, the emergence of
the United States and Soviet Union as superpowers gave Europeans an incentive
to form the EC. With European states facing the loss of their colonies, integra-
tion was necessary if they were to retain some influence in the bipolar world.
Fourth, although the United States generally opposed PTAs during the 1950s–
1960s, it supported the EC because Western Europe’s economic recovery was
viewed as essential to meeting the Soviet security threat. Indeed, U.S. insistence
that Europeans jointly administer U.S. Marshall Plan aid resulted in the for-
mation of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC) in
1948. The OEEC also oversaw moves toward the convertibility of European
currencies and the integration of West Germany in Western Europe; this laid
the foundations for the formation of the EC.19
When the Soviet Union collapsed and the Cold War ended in the early
1990s, the neomercantilist John Mearsheimer argued that the EU would no
longer be necessary to counter the Soviet threat. Thus, EU integration would

270 III THE ISSUE AREAS
decline and each EU member would begin to focus on its relative gains vis-à - vis
the other members. However, the formation of the eurozone and the expansion
of the EU to 28 members indicated that other factors also had to be considered
(see discussion in this chapter).20 Furthermore, neomercantilists looking at some
other states and regions in the 1980s– 1990s predicted that regional integration
would increase. After World War II, the United States as global hegemon used
its power and resources to support the GATT- based multilateral trade regime.
As U.S. economic hegemony declined, it was less willing to continue providing
this support, and it sought to regain its economic leverage by joining PTAs such
as NAFTA. U.S. participation in PTAs was a major factor contributing to the
rise of regional integration in the second wave.21 Some neomercantilists also
point to security considerations in explaining the formation of some North–
South bilateral FTAs. For example, Singapore and South Korea sought bilat-
eral FTAs with the United States partly to maintain a continued U.S. presence
in East Asia as a counterbalance to China, Japan, and North Korea.22
Liberal Explanations
Liberals have been the main contributors to regional integration theory.
We discuss liberal theory on the deepening of integration from an FTA to a
CU, common market, and economic union in the section of this chapter on
Europe. Liberal views concerning the reasons states form PTAs include the
following:
Global and regional institutions are created to support a liberal economic
■
order. Liberalism in the postwar era was closely linked with the creation
of the IMF, World Bank, GATT, and PTAs.
PTAs are created to promote regional peace. For example, France, West
■
Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg formed the
European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1951 to integrate France
and West Germany’s coal and steel resources and prevent them from
renewing their age-o ld conflicts. (The six ECSC members formed the EC
in 1957.) These views draw on David Mitrany’s theory of functionalism,
which states that “international economic and social cooperation is a
major prerequisite for the ultimate solution of political conflicts and the
elimination of war.”23
PTAs are formed to provide a larger market for members’ goods. The EC
■
agreement was based partly on an understanding that it would provide
a regional market for France’s agricultural goods and West Germany’s
industrial products. A major attraction of NAFTA for the two smaller
partners (Canada and Mexico) was free trade access to the much larger
U.S. market for their exports.
PTAs are formed to increase foreign investment. For example, Mexico
■
joined NAFTA partly to attract more foreign investment from the United
States; and the United States supported NAFTA partly to liberalize
regional foreign investment flows.

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 271
PTA negotiations are often a more achievable route to freer trade than
■
GATT/ WTO negotiations because they involve smaller groups of like-
minded states. Thus, the number of PTAs increased rapidly as a result
of problems with the Uruguay and Doha Rounds. Furthermore, states
may seek PTAs to provide a positive demonstration effect for the GATT/
WTO; for example, the 1988 Canada–U .S. Free Trade Agreement
(CUSFTA) included provisions on trade in services and agriculture before
GATT addressed these issues.24
PTAs are formed because of pressure from domestic groups. With
■
globalization, many private firms have become more dependent
on trade and have shifted their operations from the national to the
multinational level. These internationalist firms pressure for regional and
transregional as well as global trade agreements. Regionalism improves
the competitiveness of international firms, because they benefit from “the
larger regional markets as their base rather than just the home market.”25
PTAs are formed as part of a “two-l evel game,” in which political leaders
■
use the PTA regulations to bring about domestic changes. For example,
Canada sought the CUSFTA partly because “more open borders
would expose Canadian firms to greater international competition and
encourage them to restructure and modernize.”26
Marxist Explanations
Marxists, like liberals, see MNCs as having a central role in the creation of
PTAs (see Chapter 10). Unlike liberals, however, Marxists believe that PTAs
permit MNCs to locate their production facilities in states with the lowest taxes,
wages, and environmental standards and then export freely within the PTA.
Whereas the capitalist class benefits from the growth of PTAs, domestic labor
suffers because capital can move more easily to low- wage regions and states.
Marxists also attribute the development of PTAs to the desire of powerful
states to seek regional hegemony. As its global economic hegemony declined,
the United States sought to recoup its losses by establishing its hegemony
more firmly on a regional basis. Thus, some critics charge that NAFTA was
“designed to fit Canada and Mexico into the American model of development,
on terms amenable to American corporations.”27
THE GATT/ WTO AND PTAS
Governments and private actors have focused increasingly on PTAs to achieve
their objectives because of their disappointment with the WTO’s limitations.
As discussed in Chapter 8, the U.S. and EU have concluded TRIPS-plus
agreements that go beyond the WTO’s Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property (TRIPS) agreement. The U.S. pharmaceutical industry is one example
of private efforts to support TRIPS-p lus provisions partly to maintain their
monopolies, keep prices high, and limit the use of generic drugs. The U.S. has
PTAs with many countries that have TRIPS-p lus provisions, and LDCs often

272 III THE ISSUE AREAS
accept them in return for U.S. foreign investment and more access to the
U.S. market for their exports. The EU also provides technical assistance, finan-
cial aid, and market access in exchange for TRIPS-p lus agreements.28 A second
objective in forming PTAs is to include investor-s tate dispute settlement (ISDS)
provisions. Only states have direct access to WTO dispute settlement. The
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) by contrast was the first
PTA to also give private investors access to dispute settlement through inter-
national tribunals related to a government’s investment measures. MNCs view
the ISDS provisions in PTAs as protecting them from discrimination by states,
but neomercantilists see them as “a vehicle for investors to harass governments
whose policies they dislike.”29 A third reason for forming PTAs relates to
export promotion. The Asian “tigers”—H ong Kong, Singapore, South Korea,
and Taiwan— are highly export oriented. Exports are worth about 45 percent
of GDP in South Korea, 65 percent in Taiwan, and almost 200 percent in Hong
Kong and Singapore. The four tigers were members of only five PTAs before
2000, but they have joined 49 more, largely to promote their exports. North–
South PTAs also enable MNCs to export products and components duty- free
among the members, and to use LDCs with cheaper labor costs as export
platforms to DC markets. For example, an electronics firm can lower produc-
tion costs by locating assembly operations in low-w age LDCs, chip production
in higher- income countries such as Singapore, and high- end R&D operations
in California. In sum, there are many reasons why PTAs can provide benefits
to governments and firms beyond those provided by the WTO.30
The United States, as the postwar global hegemon, opposed preferen-
tial agreements that would interfere with an open multilateral trade regime.
However, Britain wanted to preserve its discriminatory imperial preferences, and
a number of states wanted to establish PTAs. The U.S. views largely prevailed,
and GATT Article 1 calls for unconditional MFN treatment. However, GATT
Article 24 permits countries to form FTAs and CUs that do not adhere to MFN
treatment, as long as these agreements meet specific conditions.31 Article 24’s
acceptance of CUs and FTAs stems from the liberal view that open PTAs offer
a second- best route to freer trade; thus, Article 24 seeks to ensure that the
PTAs are more trade- creating than trade-diverting. Before discussing Article
24, it is necessary to describe the ways in which PTAs are trade-c reating and
trade-diverting.
Trade Diversion
PTAs can be trade-diverting because the elimination of intra- PTA trade
barriers shifts some imports from more efficient outside suppliers to less effi-
cient PTA suppliers. Furthermore, the freeing of trade within a PTA increases
competition in member countries’ markets. Inefficient industries may lobby for
increased external trade barriers to shift the adjustment burden onto countries
outside the PTA. Thus, trade diversion can result when PTAs raise protec-
tionist barriers against outsiders. Investment diversion may also occur when
MNCs put branch plants inside a PTA to take advantage of the tariff- free zone

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 273
instead of producing in the least-cost location and shipping goods to the PTA
countries. A CU is more trade-diverting in some respects than an FTA. Even
if external tariffs do not increase when a CU is formed, protectionism may
increase if the CU imposes antidumping and countervailing duties in response
to pressure from import-c ompeting industries. These duties limit imports to
the entire CU area because of the common external tariff. Antidumping and
countervailing duties pose less of a problem for outsiders in an FTA because
each FTA member levies its own tariffs, and industries cannot pressure for
area- wide protection. However, FTAs are more trade-diverting than CUs
in terms of rules of origin, because each FTA member has its own external
tariffs. FTAs require rules of origin to prevent importers from bringing goods
in through the lowest duty member and then shipping them duty- free to other
FTA members. The rules of origin determine whether products have under-
gone enough processing within the FTA to qualify for the trade preferences. It
is difficult to formulate these rules because many goods are manufactured with
components from a number of countries. Domestic firms often pressure FTAs
for stiffer rules of origin which are more protectionist against outsiders. Rules
of origin are a less significant issue for CUs because of the common external
tariff.32 Trade diversion depends on external as well as internal factors. When
a PTA is formed, non-m ember states have an incentive to establish their own
PTAs to “better defend themselves against the discriminatory effects of other
… [PTA] groups.”33 Furthermore, regional trade blocs such as the EU become
larger when pressure from non-m ember firms triggers “membership requests
from countries that were previously happy to be non- members.”34 This prolif-
eration of PTAs fragments the global trade regime.
Trade Creation
The main source of trade creation is the increased trade among PTA members,
which shifts demand from less efficient domestic suppliers to more efficient
PTA suppliers. When firms become more competitive as a result of the PTA,
they are also more likely to support global as well as preferential free trade.
Furthermore, PTAs often achieve a deeper level of integration than multilat-
eral trade agreements because negotiations occur among a smaller number of
like- minded partners. PTAs may therefore have a positive demonstration effect
on multilateral trade negotiations. For example, the inclusion of agriculture,
services, and intellectual property in the NAFTA provided a stimulus for nego-
tiating these issues in the GATT Uruguay Round.
GATT Article 24 and PTAs
GATT Article 24 seeks to ensure that PTAs result in more trade creation than
trade diversion. To increase trade creation, Article 24 stipulates that FTAs and
CUs are to eliminate tariffs on “substantially all” trade among the members
within a “reasonable” time period. (GATT granted waivers from the substan-
tially all trade requirement for the ECSC in 1952 and the Canada– U.S. Auto

274 III THE ISSUE AREAS
Pact in 1965.) This requirement limits preferential agreements with only par-
tial trade liberalization such as those that contributed to protectionism during
the 1930s. PTAs that remove all internal trade barriers are more likely to
serve as stepping stones to multilateral free trade. To decrease trade diversion,
Article 24 stipulates that a PTA should not raise tariffs on the average to coun-
tries outside the agreement. Whereas individual members of an FTA are not to
raise their average level of duties, the common external tariff of a CU may not
“on the whole” be higher than the member states’ duties before the CU was
established. These provisions are designed to limit reductions in imports from
non-m embers as a result of the PTA.35 However, GATT Article 24 has been
more effective in theory than in practice.
The Effectiveness of GATT Article 24
When countries formed a PTA, GATT established a working party to deter-
mine whether it met the Article 24 conditions; but these working parties had
only limited influence. GATT’s regulations for PTAs were drafted with smaller
agreements in mind, such as the Benelux customs union negotiated by Belgium,
the Netherlands, and Luxembourg in 1944. In 1957 the EC members were
unwilling to wait for GATT approval before proceeding with economic inte-
gration because of the size and importance of the EC. Negotiating the Treaty
of Rome had been a difficult process, and EC members would not readjust
the treaty to satisfy GATT.36 In the end, GATT acceded to the EC demands
and never finished examining the Treaty of Rome, even though it had reached
no consensus on the treaty’s consistency with Article 24. GATT’s acquies-
cence in this case limited its authority over subsequent PTAs, and its working
parties could do little to change PTAs after member states had negotiated them.
Whereas GATT was notified about early agreements such as the EC before they
entered into force, some later agreements such as NAFTA entered into force
before a working party was even formed to examine them.37
It is not surprising that GATT had little influence over PTAs after they were
negotiated. Governments had already engaged in extensive bargaining and
were reluctant to reopen negotiations in response to outside criticism. GATT
working parties could only try to embarrass PTA members with allegations
of noncompliance and encourage them to comply with the guidelines in the
future. However, GATT did influence decision-m aking at earlier stages by
setting broad parameters for conducting the PTA negotiations. For example,
the diplomats negotiating PTAs often operated
under instructions to make maximum efforts to comply with GATT
rules, and the actual results of these negotiations testify that a quite
important degree of GATT compliance was achieved. Except for
agriculture … and except for the EC’s relationship with former col-
onies, the … developed-c ountry agreements … were essentially GATT-
conforming. To be sure, GATT was unable to do anything further once
the agreements were signed and deposited in Geneva.38

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 275
Some analysts note that GATT was less effective because Article 24
requirements that PTAs should cover “substantially all” trade, not be more
restrictive “on average” to outsiders, and be implemented in a “reasonable length
of time” are ambiguous. In view of the imprecise wording, working parties were
reluctant to give PTAs unqualified approval. By 1994, only six of 69 working
parties had reached a consensus that particular PTAs conformed to Article 24,
and only two of these six PTAs are still operative. In most cases, working parties
simply noted that members had divergent views regarding the PTA’s conformity
with GATT. However, GATT never explicitly concluded that a PTA did not meet
the legal requirements!39 To improve the regulation of PTAs, the GATT Uruguay
Round agreement included an Understanding on the Interpretation of Article 24
and a GATS article on regional trade in services (Article 5). Recall that the GATS
is an agreement for trade in services established under the WTO. The GATS,
and the TRIPS for intellectual property rights, were created to supplement the
GATT for trade in goods, or General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to extend
it to services. Furthermore, the WTO replaced the working parties with a single
Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) to determine whether PTAs
conform with the WTO. (As discussed, the WTO uses the term regional trade
agreements for transregional as well as regional agreements.)40 Although the
Uruguay Round and CRTA have dealt with some GATT Article 24 shortcomings,
many problems remain. For example, divisions persist on the interpretation of
the “substantially all trade” requirement (many PTAs exclude agriculture), and
the Uruguay Round negotiators did not decide how to deal with restrictive rules
of origin in FTAs. In 2006 a negotiating group agreed on a mechanism to ensure
that the WTO receives early notification of new PTAs; but this mechanism may
not become permanent because of the breakdown of the Doha Round.
Special Treatment for LDCs
Although GATT Article 24 was to apply to all PTAs, LDCs receive special
treatment. This is evident from the GATT/W TO’s treatment of PTAs among
LDCs and from its response to the EU association agreements with LDCs.
PTAs among LDCs The GATT/ WTO takes a more lenient approach to
PTAs among LDCs. For example, GATT accepted the formation of the Latin
American Free Trade Association in 1960, even though it “did not even
approach the requirements of total integration.”41 After Part IV on trade and
development was added to GATT in 1965, LDCs sometimes invoked it to
justify forming PTAs that did not meet Article 24’s requirement to include
substantially all trade. When the 1979 enabling clause was enacted, it became
the main legal basis for LDCs forming questionable PTAs. The enabling clause
permits LDCs to form PTAs that include a limited range of products and
decrease rather than eliminate tariffs. PTAs are eligible for special treatment
under the enabling clause if they do not include any DC members. For example,
Mercosur (discussed later) was notified to GATT under the enabling clause,

276 III THE ISSUE AREAS
not Article 24.42 Despite the GATT/W TO’s permissiveness, recent LDC moves
toward freer trade have inevitably affected their PTAs. The negative experience
of LDCs with protectionist import substitution policies, and IMF and World
Bank pressure on LDC debtors to liberalize their trade policies, have caused
PTAs among LDCs to become more outward-l ooking.
EU Association Agreements with LDCs As discussed in Chapter 8, DCs
unilaterally established a generalized system of preferences (GSP) for LDCs. EU
association agreements with LDCs by contrast are jointly negotiated preferential
agreements. When the EC was formed in 1957, the Treaty of Rome provided
associate status to France’s African Overseas Territories.43 The EC’s enlargement
when the UK, Denmark, and Ireland joined in 1973 (see Table 9.1) necessitated
a change because of Britain’s relationship with Commonwealth LDCs. In 1975,
the nine EC members concluded the first Lomé Convention (Lomé I) with 46
African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) countries; three more Lomé Conventions
followed in 1979, 1984, and 1989 (eventually with 71 ACP states). The Lomé
Conventions offered preferential access for ACP goods to the EC market without
requiring reciprocity. Critics argued that the Lomé system was not a genuine FTA
because it was nonreciprocal; GATT Article 24 provides an exception to MFN
treatment only for PTAs that follow the reciprocity principle. Furthermore, the
1979 enabling clause permits DCs to provide trade preferences only if they are
offered to all LDCs. The enabling clause does not sanction EU discrimination in
favor of its ex-c olonies at the expense of other LDCs.
The EU argued that the nonreciprocal association agreements were justified
because they contributed to LDC economic development; but external events
increased the pressures for change. In 1994 Mexico formed the NAFTA with the
United States and Canada, showing that LDCs could join in reciprocal FTAs with
DCs.44 Analysts also began to question the value of the Lomé Conventions to the
ACP states, because their share of the EU market fell from 6.7 percent in 1976
to 3 percent in 1998; more than 60 percent of the ACP exports were composed
of only 10 primary products. Marxists described EU nonreciprocal preferences
“as a form of neocolonialism that perpetuates the production of … products
not compatible” with the long-t erm interests of the ACP states.45 Thus, the EU
and ACP states negotiated the more WTO-c ompatible Cotonou Agreement (or
New Partnership Agreement) in 2000. This agreement stipulates that, beginning
in 2008, ACP–E U reciprocal “economic partnership” agreements will gradually
replace the nonreciprocal preferences over a 10- to 12-y ear period. Although
supporters of the Cotonou Agreement believe that the ACP states will benefit
by liberalizing their trade policies, critics argue that EU–A CP nonreciprocal
relations must continue because the ACPs have a lower level of development.46
The following sections focus on the EU, NAFTA, Mercosur, and two
attempts to form large transregional PTAs in view of the protracted Doha Round
negotiations: the Trans-P acific Partnership and the Trans-A tlantic Trade and

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 277
Investment Partnership. Thus, the term “EC” is used when discussing events
from 1957 to 1992, and “EU” is used for events from 1993 to the present.
THE EUROPEAN UNION
Europe has led the way in postwar regional integration, with European states as
parties to 76 of the 109 PTAs formed from 1948 to 1994.47 In 1951, six states
(Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands)
formed the ECSC and then established the EC and the European Atomic Energy
Community (Euratom) in 1957 (see Table 9.2). In 1959, seven states (Austria,
Britain, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, and Switzerland) formed the
EFTA instead of joining the EC, because the EC’s customs union threatened
Britain’s Commonwealth preference system and the nonaligned policies of
states such as Sweden and Switzerland. In 1993 the EC’s name was changed to
the EU to symbolize the extension of the community from trade and economic
matters to a much broader range of activities under the Maastricht Treaty.
As discussed, the EU is an economic union, and 19 of the 28 members have
discarded their national currencies and adopted the euro (see Table 9.1). The EU’s
institutional structure differentiates it from PTAs at lower levels of integration.
The European Commission represents general EU interests rather than those of
individual member states, and the powers of the European Court of Justice (ECJ)
are greater than those of other international courts. The EU is therefore a “supra-
national” organization that operates above the level of the nation-s tate in some
areas. However, the Council of Ministers (or Council of the European Union) is
the most powerful EU institution in day-t o-d ay politics. The fact that the Council
of Ministers is composed of foreign ministers representing their governments
is a reminder that the EU (despite its supranationality) is still beholden to its
member states. Other important EU institutions are the European Parliament and
European Council (of Heads of State and Government). In sum, the EU’s unique
institutional structure gives it more authority than other IOs, but the EU remains
subject to a considerable amount of control by its member states.48
The Deepening of European Integration
European integration has been an uneven process, sometimes marked by
obstacles and conflict, and other times by optimism and growth. For example,
the EC began its operations with considerable enthusiasm in 1957, but the
1970s were marked by “Eurosclerosis” (i.e., stagnation) and a loss of faith in the
EC’s vitality. Divisions within the EC as a result of differential taxation, border
inspections, domestic subsidies, and limits to market access were a major source
of the problem. Thus, the EC sought to create a unified European market with
more competitive firms based on specialization and economies of scale. The 1986
Single European Act (SEA) was designed to abolish nontariff barriers, liberalize
trade in services, and facilitate the movement of capital and labor by 1992, and it
also included a commitment to form an economic and monetary union (EMU).

278 III THE ISSUE AREAS
TABLE 9.2
The Deepening of European Integration
Year Event Description
1951 European Coal and • 6 states integrate their coal and steel resources
Steel Community
(ECSC)
1957 Treaty of Rome • Establishes the European Economic Community
(EC) and Euratom
1986 Single European • To free the movement of goods, services, and labor
Act (SEA) • Commitment to form a monetary union (EMU)
1992 Maastricht Treaty • Commitment to form a monetary union, and
(or Treaty on common foreign, security, and social policies
European Union) • Renames the EC the European Union (EU)
1999 Creation of the euro • 11 EU states adopt the euro as a common
currency. The eurozone members increase to
19 by 2015
2009 Lisbon Treaty • Establishes an EU high representative
• Gives new powers to European Commission,
Parliament, and Court of Justice
• Removes national vetoes in some areas
• Redistributes voting weights among member
states
Source: Authors
Monetary union was to occur in a three-s tage process, and negotiations resulted
in the Treaty on European Union or Maastricht Treaty in 1992 (see Table 9.2).
The Maastricht Treaty changed the name of the EC to the EU because the
economic pillar— the EC— was joined by two new pillars: for a common foreign
and security policy, and a common social policy. Whereas the EC sometimes uses
supranational decision- making, intergovernmental decision- making is the norm
for foreign/ security and social policy. The Maastricht Treaty also outlined a time-
table for setting up the EMU, criteria for joining the EMU (e.g., a budget deficit of
less than 3 percent of GDP, and public debt of no more than 60 percent of GDP),
and functions the EMU would perform (e.g., the role of the European Central
Bank).49 As discussed in Chapter 6, 11 EU members formed the eurozone in 1999
and agreed to adopt the euro in place of their national currencies. Eight more EU
members joined later, and the eurozone now has 19 members. The European sov-
ereign debt crisis has resulted in serious problems for the eurozone, and for the
EU in general. A major source of the problem has been the decision to establish
a monetary union without political or at least fiscal unity among those countries
adopting the euro. The transfer of tax authority to the EU continues to be limited,
exemplifying “the failure of political and fiscal integration.”50
Another aspect of the deepening of European integration relates to cross-
border migration. The Schengen Agreement calling for the gradual abolition
of border checks between countries was originally signed in 1985 by France,

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 279
Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg outside the auspices of
the EU. The agreement was incorporated into the EU framework as part of the
1997 Amsterdam Treaty, and today the Schengen Agreement has 26 member
countries. Twenty-t wo of the Schengen members are EU countries, and four
members are not in the EU: Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland.
Two EU members—t he United Kingdom and Ireland—o pted out of joining the
Schengen Agreement. The United Kingdom wanted to control its own borders,
and Ireland gave priority to its Common Travel Area with the United Kingdom
over free travel within the Schengen area. The “Arab Spring” uprisings began
to create problems in the Schengen area when France shut its borders to trains
carrying African migrants from Italy in April 2011, and the problems increased
with the large movement of migrants from Syria, Iraq, and elsewhere to Europe
in 2015. Many of the migrants are refugees seeking to escape areas of serious
conflict, and major disagreements among EU countries as to how to deal with
this issue raise questions about the viability of the Schengen Agreement over the
long term (see Chapter 12). In sum, European integration has deepened over the
years. However, eurozone problems, the Schengen agreement, and Brexit pose
major challenges for the future of the integration project.
The Widening of European Integration
As Table 9.1 shows, the EU expanded from six to 28 members in several
enlargements. Whereas the deepening of integration has often been a response
to economic conditions, the recent widening was “thrust on the EU by the
failure of communism in Europe.”51 This section focuses on the accession of
Central and Eastern European countries (CEECs) to the EU.
When the EC was formed in 1957, the Soviet Union insisted that the
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) be the vehicle for EC eco-
nomic contacts with Eastern Europe. However, the EC preferred to negotiate
bilateral agreements with Eastern European states and some of them broke
ranks with the Soviet position. For example, the EC granted the GSP to
Romania in 1972, and signed a trade and cooperation agreement with Romania
in 1980. As economic conditions in the East worsened, the Soviets softened
their position on economic linkages with the West; thus, a 1988 EC–C MEA
agreement sanctioned EC negotiations with individual Eastern European states.
After the breakup of the Soviet bloc, the EU negotiated a number of “Europe
agreements” with Eastern European states. However, the EU offered them only
limited trade concessions, and they began to apply for full EU membership.52
The wide disparity in economic development between most EU members
and the CEECs posed an obstacle to their admission. Ten CEECs that signed
Europe agreements with the EU had only one-f ourth of the purchasing power
of the EU average, and about 20 percent of their workers had agricultural jobs
compared with only 6 percent of EU workers.53 Thus, an EU Commission report
warned that admission of the CEECs would cause migration to Western Europe,
an eastward movement of firms because of lower labor costs in Eastern Europe,
and a sharp increase in the population eligible for EU social and economic

280 III THE ISSUE AREAS
development funds. However, official EU statements described enlargement as
“a political necessity and a historic opportunity.”54 Both the CEECs and the EU
saw some advantages from enlargement. The CEECs felt that EU and NATO
membership would give them security vis-à -v is Russia and that access to EU cap-
ital, technology, and markets would help close the economic gap with the West.
EU members believed that stable CEECs would provide a buffer against political
instability, the CEECs would provide the EU with cheaper workers and invest-
ment opportunities, and enlargement would enhance the EU’s external influence.
Ten CEECs were admitted to the EU in May 2004. As Table 9.1 shows, the
per capita GDP of these 10 countries was only 45.4 percent of the EU average.
Although these CEECs added 19.6 percent to the EU population, they added
only 8.9 percent to the EU’s GDP. Table 9.1 shows that the per capita GDP of
Bulgaria and Romania were only 17.7 percent of the EU average when they
joined in 2007 and that Croatia’s per capita GDP was only 38.8 percent of the
EU average when it joined in 2013. Widening need not hinder the deepening
of integration, and sometimes they occur together. However, the large number
of states involved in the CEEC enlargements and their lower level of economic
development contributed to a diversity of interests that was “harder to contain
within a single framework.”55 Many European leaders believed that the EU
enlargement necessitated major institutional reforms. To this end, a Convention
in Brussels produced a draft Constitution for Europe that was signed in October
2004. This Constitutional Treaty did not receive final approval from voters in
several states, but a less ambitious Lisbon Treaty did receive final acceptance in
2009. The provisions of the Lisbon Treaty are designed to facilitate internal and
external policymaking by the EU with its enlarged membership. As Table 9.2
shows, the Lisbon Treaty establishes a new high representative position to
give the EU more influence in international forums; gives new powers to the
European Commission, Parliament, and Court of Justice; removes national
vetoes in some areas; and redistributes voting power among the member states.
Despite the approval of the Lisbon Treaty, many uncertainties remain.
First, the treaty is complex and difficult to read, and its effects remain to be seen.
Second, Ireland was the only EU country to hold a referendum on the treaty.
EU leaders in other states circumvented ambivalent attitudes by arguing that
there was no need for referenda because Lisbon simply amended earlier treaties.
Third, both the deepening and widening of EU integration have been deeply
shaken by “the internal crisis over the euro.”56 As discussed, the EU sovereign
debt crisis has widened divisions among member states and raised questions
about the future of the eurozone (see Chapter 7). The economic problems have
contributed to strong populist fears that the migration of labor from poorer
to richer EU states is contributing to unemployment problems and adding to
pressure on social welfare systems. These populist fears were a major factor
contributing to Brexit. As for external pressures, shortly after Croatia joined the
EU in 2013, Russia took actions to prevent Armenia and Ukraine from signing
EU association agreements; and the EU has had difficulty in responding to
Russia’s strong pressures on Ukraine. Whereas the EU views Russia’s actions as
aggression, Russia argues that it is defending its own vital interests. It remains to
be seen whether “Russian pressure in the east” will drive EU members “together

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 281
or apart.”57 Adding to the external pressures, the large influx of migrants into
Europe is putting new strains on the Schengen Agreement.
BREXIT
The UK joined the EC in 1973, but its identification with Europe was limited,
and it supported differentiated integration. For example, the UK did not join
the Schengen free-t ravel agreement, and did not replace the pound sterling
with the euro. EU citizens can move freely, and have social and economic
rights, including the right to work in any member state. Immigration to the
UK resulting from the EU’s Eastern enlargement and the 2008 financial crisis
increased Euroscepticism, and under pressure from the UK Independence Party
(UKIP) and Eurosceptics in his Conservative party British Prime Minister David
Cameron promised a referendum on withdrawal from the EU if his party won
the 2015 election. Postfunctionalists point out that Cameron changed UK
policy to differentiated disintegration; i.e., “the selective reduction of a state’s
level and scope of integration.”58 Cameron first tried to negotiate reduced UK
commitments as an EU member (internal differentiated disintegration), but he
did not achieve some key objectives. In the June 23, 2016 referendum the
electorate voted by 51.9 percent to leave the EU (i.e., Brexit), so the UK now
sought external differentiated disintegration; i.e., withdrawal from the EU, and
participation in some EU policies as a nonmember.59 The Brexit vote shocked
many, because the UK was known for its outward-o riented foreign policy, tol-
erant population, and strong institutions. Several factors were central to the
leave campaign. First, they opposed the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of
the EU (CJEU) and the primacy of European law over British law. Second, they
wanted to limit immigration from other EU countries. At the same time they
wanted to maintain access to the common market for trade in goods, services,
and capital. However, the Maastricht Treaty established a common market for
labor, and other EU members would not let the UK selectively withdraw from
the labor/ migration market and maintain access in the other three markets.60
Major geographical differences were evident in the voting patterns. London,
Scotland, and Northern Ireland voted to remain in the EU by sizable majorities;
but in England outside London the leave vote was decisive. The voting patterns
resulted partly from contrasting economic fortunes. UK competitiveness for
manufactures had fallen sharply, with trade surpluses initially in the postwar
period followed by regular trade deficits from the early 1980s. Northern England
was strongly affected by this deindustrialization, with declining manufacturing
employment. Lower-i ncome, less educated, socially conservative, rural, and
older people feared that immigration, trade, and technological advances were
threatening their livelihoods. Older people also had positive memories of when
the UK was a major power. Many of those voting for Brexit were susceptible to
populism. They trusted the views of ordinary people over the “corrupt” estab-
lishment, and wanted to uphold the “native” population’s prerogatives and
limit immigration from Eastern Europe. The referendum was a means of going
to the people who “counted,” and they largely ignored the views of minor-
ities. London by contrast has prospered as a pre-e minent financial center, and

282 III THE ISSUE AREAS
this was a major factor in its opposition to Brexit. In 2015 over 30 percent of
London’s financial services exports went to the EU, and the contrasting views
of people in London and northern England were sharpened by major increases
in income inequality. Scotland and Northern Ireland also had less prosperity,
but a majority in these areas opposed Brexit for other reasons. With the UK
and Ireland in the EU, both are in the customs union and have a common
labor market. In 1993 regular customs checks between Northern Ireland and
Ireland were abolished, and this facilitated the signing of the Good Friday peace
agreement in 1998. Brexit could revive the border controls, and this would
endanger the peace agreement and renew calls for Irish unification. With only
5.3 million people and some aspirations to become an independent state,
Scotland wants to stay in the EU and benefit from access to its large market.61
After the referendum the main question was whether the UK would seek a
“soft” Brexit that would keep it in the customs union and perhaps the internal
market, or a “hard” Brexit involving only free trade. The UK chose not to remain
in the internal market and it also wanted to withdraw from the customs union
so it could make its own trade agreements. If the UK left the customs union,
there would be a hard border between Ireland and Northern Ireland. This was
unacceptable to Ireland, and the UK had to accept an “Irish backstop” agreement;
i.e., the UK could not leave the customs union until a solution to the Irish border
issue was found. The EU and UK reached a withdrawal agreement under Prime
Minister Theresa May, but the UK Parliament rejected it and she was forced to
resign. The Parliament also at first rejected the agreement negotiated by Prime
Minister Boris Johnson. However, Johnson has had Parliament’s support to “get
Brexit done” since his decisive election victory on December 12, 2019, and the
UK is now negotiating the terms of its withdrawal from the EU. Negotiating the
terms of the UK–E U relationship will be a long, difficult process. Brexit could
have serious drawbacks for the UK because its interdependence with the EU is
highly asymmetrical. For example, the EU accounts for about 44 percent of UK
goods and services exports and 53 percent of UK imports. The UK by contrast
accounts for only 6.5 percent of EU exports and 4.5 percent of EU imports. In
areas such as commercial services Brexit will undercut the UK’s strong trade
position. A large share of UK trade with the EU is in intermediate goods, and a
number of EU managers are planning to remove some of their supply chains from
the UK. The EU is also the UK’s largest foreign investment partner, accounting
for 41 percent of UK outward foreign direct investment (FDI) and 43 percent
of UK inward FDI. Brexit could also threaten UK unity, with support for a
new independence referendum in Scotland, and increased pressure for a reunified
Ireland.62 Although EU–U K interdependence is highly asymmetrical, Brexit will
also hurt the EU. Losing a large, powerful, financially important DC will weaken
the EU’s momentum and diplomatic influence.63
Theoretical Perspectives and EU Integration
Scholars have applied a wide range of theories to European integration. We
first focus on three well- known theoretical approaches: neofunctionalism,

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 283
liberal intergovernmentalism, and constructivism. We then discuss the need to
supplement these theories with two others: postfunctionalism and plutocracy.
Neofunctionalism Theorists often ask why European states have pooled
substantial elements of their sovereignty in the EU. Neofunctionalism describes
integration in one economic sector as creating pressures for further integration.
For example, the six ECSC members found that integrating their coal and steel
resources would have more benefits if they also integrated their transportation
systems for moving the coal and steel. Thus, regional integration has an expansive
logic, in which integration in one economic sector creates pressures for spillover into
related sectors. Spillover can also contribute to the deepening of integration from
an FTA to a CU, common market, and economic union. Whereas functionalists
see spillover as an automatic process, neofunctionalists see political activism by
interest-d riven actors as also necessary. First, integration in one sector engenders
increased transactions and new organizations representing business, labor, and
consumer interests at the regional level. These regional interests exert political
pressure for deeper integration. Second, the supranational bureaucracy (the
European Commission in the EU) has a vested interest in expanding its authority
through deepening integration over a wider range of sectors. Thus, Ernst Haas
describes integration as “the process whereby political actors in several distinct
national settings are persuaded to shift their loyalties, expectations and political
activities toward a new center, whose institutions possess or demand jurisdiction
over the pre-e xisting national states.”64 Neofunctionalism had considerable
influence on the study of regional integration, but its influence varied over the
years. The expansion of integration from the ECSC to the EC seemed to support
neofunctionalism, but problems such as Eurosclerosis in the 1970s raised
questions about the expansive logic of the theory. Neofunctionalist ideas such as
“spillover” had somewhat of a revival in the 1990s with the SEA, the Maastricht
Treaty, and the creation of the EMU, but the newer neofunctionalists viewed it
as a less ambitious theory that explained only some aspects of the integration
process. Few scholars call themselves neofunctionalists today because the theory
has been subject to numerous criticisms. First, the tortuous path of European
integration demonstrates conflicting pressures for integration and diversity, and
there is no certainty that spillover will occur. Second, neofunctionalists tended
to ignore the fact that the average citizen has been more skeptical of European
integration than the elites. Contrary to what Haas predicted, citizens have not
shifted their “loyalties, expectations and political activities toward a new center.”
Third, critics argue that the member states, rather than interest groups and the
EU institutions, have the main power in the EU. States resist further integration
when it does not serve their national objectives.65
Liberal Intergovernmentalism Whereas neofunctionalists focus on societal
interests and supranational institutions, liberal intergovernmentalists assert that

284 III THE ISSUE AREAS
member states (central governments) remain free to choose how the EU functions.
Andrew Moravcsik is the founder of liberal intergovernmentalism, which is
“liberal” in its view of governments as bringing together domestic interest groups
within a state, and “intergovernmentalist” in its emphasis on the central role of
states (which also shows the influence of neomercantilism). Moravcsik argues that
the EU rests on a series of bargains between member states, which are self-i nterested
and rational in pursuing outcomes that serve their economic interests. Major policy
decisions reflect the preferences of national governments rather than supranational
institutions, and each state’s preferences reflect the balance of its domestic economic
interests. Conflict may arise among states with different preferences, and the
status quo changes only when the largest states accept compromise agreements.
Intergovernmentalists seek to explain how national interests are reconciled in
intergovernmental bargains, and they see the EU as occupying “a permanent
position at the heart of the European landscape” only because of decisions by
member states.66 European integration is reversible, because member states support
the EU supranational institutions as a means of enforcing intergovernmental
bargains. Whereas neofunctionalists are criticized for underemphasizing the role
of governments, liberal intergovernmentalists are criticized for overemphasizing
their role. Moravcsik focuses on a series of “grand bargains” among governments,
but devotes less attention to the EU’s day-t o-d ay politics. Because governments
cannot monitor daily activities, institutions such as the EU Commission have
considerable discretion in making decisions. Furthermore, neofunctional theorists
argue that state bargains may have “unintended consequences” in giving more
discretion than states anticipate to supranational institutions.
Constructivism Neofunctionalists and liberal intergovernmentalists emphasize the
role of material factors such as interests in the integration process. Constructivists
by contrast focus on the role of ideas, norms, and identity. In studying European
integration, we need to understand not only the EU’s interactions with member
states and interest groups, but also the effects of national self-i mage, identity, and
views of the integration process. For example, compliance with EU principles and
rules often depends less on EU sanctions and rewards than on whether a country
sees itself as law-a biding. Some EU states are noted for implementing EU laws even
when there is strong domestic opposition to them. Compliance with EU rules also
depends on the development of a European identity within societies, and this can
only occur if there is some compatibility between the EU and the core elements of
national identity. Furthermore, assessments of the integration process require some
understanding of the developing European identity. If various European groups do
not view some states, such as Turkey, as being “European,” they may oppose their
joining the EU even if they meet the objective criteria for membership. Although
constructivists correctly alert us to the importance of ideas, norms, and identities,
critics argue that they have not yet developed shared theoretical principles and
research strategies for studying the integration process.67

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 285
Postfunctionalism Neofunctionalists and liberal intergovernmentalists
both view preferences as largely economic and emphasize bargaining
among interest groups. Whereas intergovernmentalists examine the role of
interest groups at the national level, neofunctionalists focus on groups at the
supranational as well as national level. Neofunctionalists sometimes refer
to the concept of spillback, when states withdraw from certain obligations
to European integration. Nevertheless, neofunctionalists and liberal
intergovernmentalists generally assume “that the EU cannot or can hardly
disintegrate.”68 Liesbet Hooghe and Gary Marks by contrast argue that
we must go beyond assessing the economic preferences of interest groups
today because European integration has become more politicized and
affected by mass publics. Whereas neofunctionalists felt that politicization
would generally result in further integration, postfunctionalists argue
that politicization is making integration more contentious; for example,
including Eastern Europeans increased the divergence of interests among
EU states. The elite must now take more account of public concerns that
integration is threatening national sovereignty, increasing immigration,
intensifying economic competition, and redistributing income. Thus,
European integration has become the focus of contentious elections, party
competition, and referenda.69 As Brexit, discussed earlier in this chapter,
shows, postfunctionalists point out that politicization in the UK can lead
to disintegration. Postfunctionalists also raise the possibility of further
disintegration in the EU, with divisions among countries exacerbated by
the European debt crisis (discussed in Chapter 6) and the refugee crisis that
began in 2015. These crises have contributed to the rise of Euroscepticism
and populist parties. However, Euroscepticism has been stronger in the UK
than in other EU countries, so for other countries partial exit from some
obligations is more likely than a full exit from the EU.70
Plutocracy Integration theory has been so fixated on the EU that it has not
focused on other forms of governance. For example, a study by Kathleen
Hancock focuses on plutocracy, in which “smaller member states delegate
policymaking to the wealthiest state in the integration accord.”71 The Eurasian
Customs Union formed by Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan in 2007, which
became the Eurasian Economic Union in 2015 (also including Armenia and
Kyrgyzstan), has some characteristics of a plutocracy.
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
Regionalism in the Western Hemisphere is more heterogeneous than in Europe.
Efforts to form a Free Trade Area of the Americas for the entire hemisphere
failed, and the most important PTAs are NAFTA and Mercosur. As discussed,
the United States would not participate in comprehensive PTAs from the
1940s to the early 1970s, and it focused instead on GATT-b ased multilateral

286 III THE ISSUE AREAS
trade. However, a reversal of U.S. policies combined with greater openness
to free trade in Canada and Mexico resulted in the Canada– U.S. Free Trade
Agreement (CUSFTA) in 1988 and the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) in 1994.
The Formation of NAFTA
A noted Canadian historian has observed that one economic issue in Canada
“comes close to rivalling the linguistic and race question for both longevity and
vehemence, and this is, of course, the question of free trade with the United
States.”72 In 1854, the two countries concluded a Reciprocity Treaty providing
for free trade in natural products such as grains, meat, dairy products, and fish.
However, the United States abrogated the treaty in 1866 because of its negative
trade balance with Canada, increased Canadian duties on U.S. manufactures,
and the British role in the U.S. Civil War. Efforts to revive free trade in 1911 and
1948 were unsuccessful, but the 1965 Canada– U.S. Auto Agreement provided
for free trade in automobiles and parts (GATT provided a waiver from the
Article 24 provision that FTAs should cover substantially all trade). In 1988
the two states established a comprehensive FTA, the CUSFTA; when Mexico,
the United States, and Canada signed NAFTA in 1992, it superseded CUSFTA.
The question arises why these FTAs were formed after so many years.
The United States reversed its policy on PTAs with the 1974 U.S. Trade Act,
which permitted the president to “initiate negotiations for a trade agreement
with Canada to establish a free trade area.”73 However, Canadian and
Mexican requests initiated the negotiations for CUSFTA and NAFTA. Both
countries had become more dependent on trade with the United States and
cross- border production with U.S. companies, and they viewed freer trade as a
means of increasing their competitiveness. When the United States responded
to its balance- of- payments deficits in the mid- 1980s with increased protec-
tionism, Canada viewed an FTA as necessary to gain more assured access to
the U.S. market. Mexico was concerned about Canada’s favored position as a
U.S. trader in the Canada– U.S. FTA, and as an LDC Mexico viewed an FTA
as essential for attracting more U.S. foreign investment. The United States as a
major economic power was more concerned about global trade linkages, and
it concluded the CUSFTA and NAFTA largely because of frustration with the
slow pace of the GATT Uruguay Round. Negotiating PTAs, in the U.S. view,
would induce the EU and Japan to offer concessions in the GATT negotiations.
PTAs also tend to breed more PTAs, and the EU’s enlargement gave the United
States another reason to join PTAs. Furthermore, the United States became
less committed to multilateralism as the sole option as its trade hegemony
declined. The United States also wanted Canada and Mexico to ease their
regulations on foreign investment and natural resources, and it was willing
to open its market to Canadian and Mexican goods in return. Cross- border
intraindustry trade and gains from economies of scale also induced producers
in key sectors such as computers, automobiles, electronics, and machinery to
pressure for a PTA.74

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 287
Assessing NAFTA as a Free Trade Agreement
Unlike the EU, NAFTA has remained a free trade agreement. All three coun-
tries have been skeptical of EU- type supranational institutions that would
infringe national sovereignty, and the U.S. Congress has resisted agreements
that interfere with U.S. trade policy. However, Mexico and Canada as the
two smaller NAFTA members realized that some integration was necessary to
protect their interests, even if it impinged on their sovereignty. For example,
Canada views U.S. antidumping and countervailing duty laws as protectionist,
and favors either their elimination among NAFTA members or a common
code to define which subsidies are permissible. However, the United States sees
the use of ADDs and CVDs as its sovereign prerogative, and NAFTA dispute
settlement panels can only decide whether a country’s decision to levy a CVD
is made in accordance with its own law; the panels cannot assess the fairness
of each country’s laws. When Vicente Fox became Mexico’s president in 2000,
he proposed that NAFTA extend to the free movement of labor as well as
goods and services, and that a development fund be established to upgrade
North American infrastructure. However, the United States and Canada did
not support these proposals, and the NAFTA approach depends on the market
to facilitate integration and decrease inequalities.75 Although NAFTA includes
some innovative features in services, agricultural trade, investment, and dispute
settlement, it remains an FTA with a minimal degree of institutionalization.
How successful has NAFTA been as an FTA? NAFTA was contentious from
the time it was formed, with supporters overestimating its possible benefits, and
opponents overestimating its drawbacks. Thus, authors of a 2014 assessment
write that “in truth the claims on both sides of the NAFTA issue 20 years ago
were overblown.”76 The contentiousness over NAFTA continued, and it was
invoked by both sides in the debate over whether the United States should par-
ticipate in a much larger Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement (the TPP
is discussed later). The controversy over NAFTA in all three member countries
is reflected in divisions among and within the GPE theoretical perspectives.
Liberalism Liberal economists often see NAFTA as an open FTA that serves as
a stepping stone to multilateral free trade. NAFTA had a positive demonstration
effect on the WTO in services trade, investment, and intellectual property rights,
and it goes beyond the WTO in these areas. For example, NAFTA follows a
“negative list” approach to national treatment for trade in services, which puts
the onus on each member to list the services it wants to exclude from national
treatment; all services a country does not list are automatically included. The
General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), by contrast, takes a “positive
list” approach; that is, national treatment applies only to sectors included in
a member’s list of commitments. Although liberals acknowledge that NAFTA
has produced both winners and losers, they believe that the rewards greatly
exceed the costs, and they place particular emphasis on private enterprise.77
For example, the U.S. Department of Commerce finds “overwhelming evidence
across the United States that NAFTA-r elated trade and investment liberalization

288 III THE ISSUE AREAS
has allowed U.S. firms to maximize efficiencies, remain globally competitive,
and increase sales and exports as a result.”78 Liberals also point to the positive
effects of NAFTA on foreign investment, noting that “in 1993, Mexico’s inward
stock of FDI was just $52 billion, about 7 percent of GDP. By 2012, the stock
reached $315 billion, some 27 percent of GDP.”79 Overall, liberals laud NAFTA
for increasing interdependence among the three countries.
Despite this generally positive assessment, liberals also point to NAFTA
problems. For example, liberals criticize restrictions that continue to limit
trade and investment. One study notes that “while CUSFTA and NAFTA both
contained services chapters … regulatory barriers to cross-b order trade in ser-
vices were not much reduced.”80 Liberals also consider rules of origin to be a
protectionist device in FTAs and they note that NAFTA has highly restrictive
rules of origin for automobiles, textiles and apparel, and color televisions.
Recognizing that interdependence requires more policy coordination, many
liberals favor a deepening of integration; for example, some liberals propose
that NAFTA should become a customs union.81 Differences, of course, exist
among liberals. Orthodox liberals often praise NAFTA for its market orien-
tation and for being the first North–S outh FTA that does not give special
treatment to LDC members (Mexico). Interventionist liberals by contrast argue
that some measures should be taken to deal with the wide disparity between
incomes, wages, and standards in NAFTA; and institutional liberals call for
more institutions to address NAFTA’s internal and external shortcomings.
Orthodox liberals also view NAFTA’s environmental and labor side agreements
as nontrade issues that can be used to impose protectionist trade barriers,
whereas interventionist liberals see these agreements as necessary to correct
market imperfections. Finally, some liberals such as Jagdish Bhagwati are more
critical of the proliferation of PTAs than others. Despite these differences, most
liberals generally favor NAFTA as an open PTA. For example, one liberal study
concludes that “NAFTA remains vital to maintaining trade and investment in
the three countries and helps anchor the economic health of the North American
marketplace.”82
Neomercantilism Neomercantilists emphasize NAFTA’s asymmetries in power
and levels of economic development. They reject the liberal view that smaller
states often benefit from FTAs more than larger states because of increased
exports and economies of scale. As the larger partner, the United States expects
its benefits from free trade to outweigh those of the smaller partners. For
example, Canada sought free trade with the United States to gain more assured
access to the U.S. market; but the United States expected side payments in
return such as less regulation of U.S. foreign investment, greater U.S. access
to Canadian energy, and a services trade agreement. The United States also
expected Mexico to grant access to its market for U.S. agricultural goods
and to give up claims as an LDC to special treatment. Neomercantilists also
see NAFTA as a threat to national sovereignty. For example, they are highly
critical of NAFTA’s Chapter 11, which gives private investors access to binding

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 289
international arbitration in disputes over a host government’s investment
measures. (This contrasts with WTO dispute settlement cases where only states
are directly involved in dispute settlement.) Chapter 11 has resulted in some high-
profile investor suits against government efforts to implement environmental
and health regulations. Whereas liberals view NAFTA’s Chapter 11 as an
innovative mechanism that permits foreign enterprises to prevent states from
discriminating against them, neomercantilists see it as “a vehicle for investors to
harass governments whose policies they dislike.”83 Neomercantilists also argue
that the benefits of NAFTA are overrated, because PTAs are “no substitute for
a coherent national development strategy.”84
Marxists argue that NAFTA is shifting power to the capitalist class and
against labor groups. For example, NAFTA enables MNCs to avoid labor and
environmental standards in Canada and the United States by relocating pro-
duction in Mexico. As capital leaves the United States and Canada, wages and
employment in these countries decline. Some Marxists use the terms core and
periphery to designate social position and class rather than geographic loca-
tion, arguing that NAFTA has relegated many U.S. and Canadian workers to
peripheral status. For example, one study concludes that Mexico’s emergence
as a clothing exporter “to the United States as a result of NAFTA has been
accompanied by dramatic growth of garment maquiladora employment south
of the border and a dramatic decline in the garment industry north of the border,
especially among manual, direct production workers.”85 The losses for U.S. and
Canadian workers, according to Marxists, do not result in comparable gains
for Mexican workers. For example, NAFTA is destroying the livelihoods of
Mexican peasants because U.S. corn, which benefits from government subsidies,
is being freely exported to Mexico. Marxists therefore argue that NAFTA is
increasing poverty and inequality between the rich and poor in all three states.
A 2014 study concludes that NAFTA has “contributed to mass job losses,
soaring income inequality, agricultural instability, corporate attacks on domestic
health and environmental safeguards, and mass displacement and volatility in
Mexico.”86 Some Gramscian theorists assert that a coalition of labor, environ-
mental, consumer, and women’s groups should form a counterhegemonic bloc
against the domination of corporate capital in NAFTA. This bloc would replace
the corporate view of liberalization in North America with a more democratic,
participatory model.87
Environmentalism NAFTA was the first significant trade agreement to include
an environmental side agreement and establish institutions for monitoring and
finance. During the NAFTA negotiations, there were serious disagreements over
the environmental provisions. The greens such as Greenpeace, Public Citizen,
and the Sierra Club argued that the NAFTA provisions favored corporate
interests and trade liberalization over environmental concerns. For example,
they charged that NAFTA’s Chapter 11 opened a new legal channel for private
investors to contest a state’s environmental policies, and they dismissed the
environmental side agreement as ineffective and unenforceable. In contrast, some

290 III THE ISSUE AREAS
business groups argued that the environmental side agreement would interfere
with free trade and result in costly new regulations. Liberal environmental
groups such as the World Wildlife Fund, Environmental Defense, and the
National Resources Defense Council took a position between these extremes.
Although they wanted the side agreement to put more emphasis on the upward
harmonization of environmental standards, they favored trade liberalization and
generally supported the efforts to include environmental provisions in NAFTA.
The NAFTA environmental provisions in fact have been mixed and in need
of improvement. One study concludes that “Mexico’s environmental laws have
improved since NAFTA came into force,” but that “Canada’s post-N AFTA record
has been less impressive.”88 Another study by contrast argues that Mexico’s
governments have lacked commitment to environmental protection in the post-
NAFTA era, and spending and inspection levels have declined. Whereas many
greens see NAFTA as beyond repair, interventionist liberals believe that the NAFTA
environmental provisions can be upgraded by adopting stronger provisions. For
example, some interventionists argue that the environmental provisions should be
subjected to the same enforcement and dispute resolution provisions as the com-
mercial parts of NAFTA.89 In the view of two noted liberals,
it makes more sense to tackle the shortcomings than to lament the
existence of an FTA, as many environmentalists do, or to overlook
the problems, as a very few diehard free trade advocates might. With
the necessary tuning, NAFTA can become a trade agreement that both
environmentalists and free traders appreciate.90
In sum, NAFTA has been highly contentious in all three member states.
A major problem is that NAFTA supporters and opponents have focused on
different aspects of the agreement. Whereas supporters have lauded NAFTA
“for enhancing economic linkages between countries, creating more efficient
production processes [and] increasing the availability of lower- priced con-
sumer goods,” opponents have blamed NAFTA “for disappointing employ-
ment trends, a decline in U.S. wages, and for not having done enough to
improve labor standards and environmental conditions.”91
The Renegotiation of NAFTA: The United States– Mexico– Canada
(USMCA) Agreement
The election of Donald Trump in 2016 signaled a wave of anti-g lobalization
sentiment. During the campaign, Trump has singled out trade agreements and
practices, particularly those of China, as creating a “bad deal” for American
workers, especially those in manufacturing, where thousands of jobs have been
lost over the past two decades. Trump attributed continued trade deficits to
unfair trade practices. Once in office, Trump pulled out of the Trans Pacific
Partnership and began to use tariffs and renegotiations to attempt to change the
terms of trade and “bring jobs back” to the U.S. In 2017, he placed tariffs on
solar panels, washing machines, steel and aluminum, affecting multiple trade

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 291
partners. His administration also banned American firms from using Huawei
technology or selling to them, citing security and intellectual property concerns.
Trump’s use of tariffs is unprecedented in modern times, and his citation of
national security concerns around certain imports, of steel from Canada, for
example, are abuses of safeguard provisions established under the GATT/W TO.
As discussed in Chapter 1, the NAFTA was renegotiated in 2019. The
Trump administration’s new trade agreement with Mexico and Canada, the
United States–M exico– Canada Agreement (USMCA), met with the approval
by the Democratic-c ontrolled U.S. House of Representatives in early 2020, after
a few amendments, including setting benchmarks for Mexican labor enforce-
ment. The administration’s trade deal had provisions that Democrats had long
supported, such as measures to strengthen Mexican labor unions, downgrade
NAFTA’s Chapter 11 which gives private investors access to binding inter-
national arbitration in disputes over government investment measures, and
encourage auto companies to make more of a car’s parts in North America. In
the new agreement, at least 70 percent of an automakers steel and aluminum
must be bought in North America, and 40– 45 percent of an auto’s content
must be made by workers that earn an average wage of at least $16 an hour.
Automakers will therefore have to either raise wages in Mexico or hire more
workers in the United States and Canada. The agreement also gives U.S. dairy
producers greater access to the Canadian market. In other areas, particularly
dispute settlement and cultural industries, Canadian negotiators were able to
hold the line on concessions. Preliminary estimates of the impact of the new
deal were modest,92 with the U.S. International Trade Commission93 estimating
that it would increase gross domestic product by 0.35 percent after inflation,
or $68.2 billion, and create 175,700 jobs.
Despite the Democrats’ support for various aspects of the agreement, they
viewed some provisions as not going far enough, and they opposed others.
They argued that the labor and environmental provisions were too weak and
lacked adequate enforcement mechanisms. They also opposed a provision
to increase intellectual property protection to 10 years for some advanced
drugs, because it would raise drug prices. After months of negotiations, key
Democrats and Republicans agreed to strengthen the labor, environmental, and
enforcement provisions, and to downgrade the intellectual property protection
for some advanced drugs. As a result, the U.S. Congress gave final approval
to the revised USMCA in January 2020. Nine Democrats voted against the
agreement, mainly because it lacked provisions to deal with climate change.94
MERCOSUR
PTAs in Latin America during the 1960s– 1970s were inward- looking, but there
was a revival of Latin American regionalism in the mid-1 980s on a more open
basis. The largest of these newer PTAs is Mercosur (Mercosul in Portuguese),
or the Common Market of the Southern Cone. In 1991 Argentina, Brazil,
Paraguay, and Uruguay signed the Treaty of Asuncio﻿́n (TOA) to establish
Mercosur, and Venezuela joined as a full member in 2012, but was suspended

292 III THE ISSUE AREAS
in 2016 for alleged violations of Mercosur’s democratic principles. The TOA
timetable included the formation of an FTA from 1991 to 1994, a CU in 1995,
and eventually a common market; this schedule was unusual for Latin America,
where most integration plans included only vague promises. Mercosur’s signifi-
cance also stemmed from the importance of its two largest members, Brazil and
Argentina. Many observers were skeptical about Mercosur because of Latin
America’s history of inward- looking development policies and the long-t erm
enmity between Brazil and Argentina. However, most Latin American LDCs
were active participants in the GATT Uruguay Round, and the Argentine and
Brazilian presidents supported integration because of their neoliberal economic
strategies and their belief that integration would strengthen their position vis-
à- vis the United States and the EU.95
The integration process was quite dynamic from 1991 to 1995 as tariffs
were gradually eliminated and some business firms began to organize their
production and sales on a regional basis. However, Brazil and Argentina
introduced new tariffs and NTBs after 1995, and intra-M ercosur exports as
a share of total exports declined. During the 1990s regional trade had risen
from 10 to 25 percent of total trade, but from 1999 to 2003 it fell back to
about 10 percent. From 1999 to 2002 the devaluation of the Brazilian cur-
rency and the subsequent crisis in Argentina put Mercosur in serious jeopardy.
Beginning in 2003, the member states have taken steps to revive Mercosur with
political and social as well as economic agreements. For example, a Mercosur
Parliament (which only makes political recommendations) was formed in 2005.
However, political and economic problems remain; one example was the sus-
pension of Paraguay from Mercosur in June 2012. Although most merchandise
trade within Mercosur is now duty-f ree, rules do not extend to services trade,
government purchases, and many NTBs and administrative barriers. Mercosur
has also not yet established a CU with a common external tariff. To maintain a
CET, no member state can negotiate bilaterally with outside states.96
International, regional, and national factors account for Mercosur’s
problems. First, Mercosur members as LDCs are highly vulnerable to inter-
national developments. For example, the Mexican and East Asian financial
crises in the 1990s contributed to the loss of markets for Latin American
exports and a marked decrease in the prices of primary commodities. Second,
in 2005 intra-M ercosur trade accounted for only 13 percent of the members’
total trade. Only about 10 percent of Brazil’s trade was with other Mercosur
members in 2012. The dependence on trade with external actors such as the
United States and the EU limits Mercosur’s importance. Third, there is a high
level of asymmetry, with Brazil accounting for about 70 percent of Mercosur’s
GDP. To ensure that Mercosur does not infringe its sovereignty, Brazil has
opposed a strong dispute- settlement body.97 Fourth, Mercosur has done little
to harmonize the members’ macroeconomic policies. In 1991 Argentina pegged
its peso to the U.S. dollar, whereas Brazil adjusted its exchange rate. After Brazil
devalued its currency in 1999, Argentina’s trade balance with Brazil sharply
deteriorated and many companies moved from Argentina to Brazil. By 2001,
Argentina had a massive foreign debt and defaulted on its loans partly because

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 293
its peso was pegged to the U.S. dollar. This provided the setting for the 1999–
2002 crisis in Mercosur, which ultimately resulted in an Argentinian devalu-
ation.98 As Mercosur economies recovered amid higher commodity prices,
driven primarily by Chinese demand, there appeared to be a new window for
cooperation in the bloc. A “pink tide” of center- left governments including Evo
Morales in Bolivia, Lula in Brazil, Kirchner in Argentina, and Bachelet in Chile
seemed to open the way for expansion towards left socialist governments such
as that of Chávez in Venezuela and Correa in Ecuador. However, disputes over
Chávez’s handling of political opposition derailed the project, and Venezuela
was suspended. Following the global financial crisis in 2008, commodity prices
have fallen off, and with them the fortunes of the Mercosur economies. The
pink tide was reversed and continuing politico- economic crisis in Argentina
has been matched by parallel crises in the other Mercosur states (other than
Uruguay), preventing further advances in the bloc.
The one shining achievement has been the agreement to an EU-M ercosur
trade deal in 2019. The agreement reflects the different trade and investment
profiles of the Mercosur countries from those in North America, such as
Mexico, who are largely dependent on the U.S. The South American countries,
by contrast, have always had a more balanced mix of trade and investment
partners with the U.S. and the EU, and more recently with China. The failure
of the FTAA (Free Trade Agreement of the Americas) pushed Mercosur to start
negotiating an alternative agreement with the EU as far back as 1999. The deal
centers on the removal of some tariffs for South American agriculture in return
for greater opening for EU manufactures and specialized food products, intel-
lectual property rights, and an opening- up of government procurement. The
agreement has not yet been ratified but is being met with opposition by indi-
genous rights groups and environmentalists who fear further Amazon destruc-
tion and by European farmers who fear greater competition. There are further
concerns about how to ensure health and phytosanitary regulations meeting
EU standards are met in Mercosur production.99
Neomercantilists see Mercosur as contributing to security as well as eco-
nomic ties; Argentina and Brazil have upgraded their military cooperation,
with joint military exercises and annual meetings between their joint chiefs
of staff. Neomercantilists also argue that Mercosur strengthens its members’
bargaining power vis- à- vis the United States and the EU. Liberals favor
widening the scope of Mercosur’s trade liberalization and predict that domestic
business groups will continue to see Mercosur as a means of attracting for-
eign investment. Marxists argue that Mercosur resulted from IMF pressure on
Latin Americans to liberalize their policies and that Mercosur incorporates its
members “within the world capitalist system while preserving their subordinate
status in the system.”100 Constructivists have asked whether efforts to extend
Mercosur to social and political areas since 2003 have helped in establishing
a feeling of collective identity. It remains to be seen how the balance between
the forces of regionalism and nationalism affects the future of Mercosur as a
PTA. In the end, Mercosur has to be judged in light of the regional context.
The member countries have much to gain from trade and shared investment,

294 III THE ISSUE AREAS
including the potential to negotiate better collective deals with other regions
such as the EU. However, internal problems in Brazil and Argentina, the two
giants of the region, have prevented regional institutions such as the Parlasur
(the regional parliament), modeled after the EU, from having anything but
formal trappings.101
THE TRANS- PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP AND ITS
SUCCESSOR AGREEMENT
Difficulties with completing the WTO Doha Round, and with the “spaghetti
bowl” of smaller bilateral FTAs that often have conflicting provisions, have
sparked an effort to negotiate several much larger transregional and regional
PTAs. In 2008, President George W. Bush indicated that the United States would
begin trade talks with a small group of Pacific Rim countries that had signed a
trade agreement, and the group gradually increased to 12 countries. President
Barack Obama continued the talks, and the Trans- Pacific Partnership (TPP)
was signed in 2012 by the 12 countries which accounted for about 40 percent
of world GDP: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico,
New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States, and Vietnam. The TPP was
designed to promote trade liberalization well beyond what was achieved in the
WTO, and would involve difficult reforms for the member countries’ econ-
omies. In geopolitical terms, the Obama administration viewed the TPP as
important in countering China’s growing influence in Asia. China would not
consider joining it because of the trade liberalization required. U.S. proponents
also viewed the TPP as crucial because an alternative agreement was being
negotiated. China is closely involved with a proposed Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership (RCEP). In 2013, the RCEP idea was announced, which
would include China, the 10 members of ASEAN, and five other countries in
the region. The RCEP would be much less ambitious than the TPP in terms
of depth and scope of liberalization. Since the RCEP is limited to Asia- Pacific
countries, it would marginalize the United States.
The TPP proved to be highly controversial during the 2016 Presidential
campaign, with both Republican and Democratic candidates criticizing
it. Opponents argued that it would increase the U.S. trade deficit, push
U.S. manufacturing jobs elsewhere, and not deal with currency manipulation
by some other traders. When President Trump took office in January 2017,
one of his first actions was to pull the United States out of the TPP. After some
delay, the other 11 countries decided to renegotiate the agreement without the
United States, and in March 2018 they signed a revamped Comprehensive and
Progressive Agreement for Trans- Pacific Partnership (CPTPP). The CPTPP
entered into force in December 2018 after the first six countries ratified it.
This action shows that the other 11 countries in the proposed TPP were
willing to move ahead without the United States, but the CPTPP is a much
less significant agreement than the TPP would have been. The RCEP has not
yet entered into force, but with trade tensions between the Trump administra-
tion and major trading partners, Asian countries are looking to the RCEP as a

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 295
possible outlet for their exports. It has therefore become more likely that the
RCEP will be approved and ratified. With China and India as members, the
RCEP would account for almost half of the world’s population, and for about
30 percent of global GDP. RCEP would provide China with an important new
pivot to the Asia Pacific.102
Do PTAs Create or Divert Trade?
During the postwar period there have been two major waves of PTAs, the first
in the 1950s and 1960s, and the second since the mid- 1980s. Globalization has
provided a stimulus to the second wave, which has been more enduring. As we have
discussed, trade theorists have focused primarily on North– North PTAs, but the
second wave of EU enlargement, Lomé Conventions, and NAFTA represent North–
South agreements. A third category is South–South agreements. There has been a
steady proliferation of agreements in this category beyond Mercosur from ASEAN
to CAFTA (Central American Free Trade Agreement) to CARICOM (Caribbean
Community and Common Market), to the more recent wave of intra- African
agreements such as the SADC (Southern African Development Community), and the
AfCFTA (Africa Continental Free Trade Area). The South– South agreements are
designed to expand consumer markets and improve the global competitiveness of
Southern companies. The effects of each trade agreement and its compatibility with
multilateral efforts has to be analyzed separately over time, but the general debate
around PTAs vs. multilateralism is worth considering.
A contentious issue among economic liberals in the current wave is whether
PTAs serve as stepping stones or obstacles to global free trade; thus, some major
debates in GPE are among theorists within the same perspective. Liberals generally
agree that multilateralism is the best route to trade liberalization and that open
PTAs are a second- best option because they divert some imports from more
efficient outside suppliers to less efficient regional suppliers. However, some liberals
see PTAs today as a serious threat to an open multilateral trade regime, whereas
others believe that PTAs can coexist beneficially with multilateralism.
A notable theorist taking the first position is Jagdish Bhagwati, who describes
PTAs as “termites” that are “eating away at the multilateral trading system.”103
Bhagwati and others in the first group present several arguments to show that PTAs
pose a threat to the global trade regime: PTAs are discriminatory and therefore
incompatible with MFN treatment, a basic trade regime principle; LDCs have a
special exemption for PTAs under the enabling clause, which allows them to engage
in discrimination without any discipline; the recent proliferation of bilateral FTAs
is bringing chaos to the global trade regime, with different rules and tariff rates for
each FTA; PTAs are creating a “spaghetti- bowl” of different rules and procedures;
FTA rules of origin are often used as a disguised form of protectionism; many
bilateral FTAs between rich and poor countries permit “the exercise of virtually
unconstrained political and economic power by the United States and EU to
secure concessions”;104 and PTAs divert valuable resources away from multilateral
negotiations. The second group of liberals agree that PTAs can create problems
such as trade diversion. However, they see some plurilateral FTAs such as NAFTA
as more trade- creating than diverting, and they believe that PTAs can coexist
with global trade liberalization. When NAFTA was formed, Gary Clyde Hufbauer

296 III THE ISSUE AREAS
and Jeffrey J. Schott predicted (in 1993) that “on balance … the trade created
by growth in the NAFTA region should more than offset the trade diverted in
particular sectors.”105 In a 2005 study, Hufbauer and Schott referred to empirical
studies which “on balance … find that NAFTA tends to promote trade creation
more than trade diversion.” Although the authors criticize NAFTA for its restrictive
rules of origin, they rate the agreement as a “success.”106 Liberals in the second
group also support the large transregional CPTPP, which they view as a possible
stepping stone to global trade liberalization. Arguments of theorists in the second
group include the following: FTAs contribute to economies of scale and a division
of labor based on comparative advantage; trade creation is likely to be greater than
trade diversion if the FTA members are already major trading partners; PTAs allow
members to overcome disagreements, which helps reduce the complexity of the WTO
negotiations; and by promoting deeper integration at the regional and transregional
levels, PTAs can lead the way for multilateral trade negotiations. For example,
NAFTA liberalized trade in services and agriculture before the GATT/ WTO.107
Although liberal theorists often base their findings on empirical studies, “different
studies come out with different trade effects for the same PTAs. This is due to the
use of different estimation methods, different databases and time periods to measure
these trade effects.”108 In the first group, Bhagwati uses historical analysis to show
that political factors resulted in the exceptions the GATT/W TO provides to PTAs,
and he views these exceptions as mainly trade-diverting. In the second group, many
analysts focus on specific PTAs for which they have a strong affinity. For example,
Hufbauer and Schott want NAFTA to establish a common external tariff, strengthen
its institutions, and promote closer monetary cooperation. Thus, the diversity of
findings does not result only from different methodologies; nonmaterial factors such
as the assumptions and values of the theorists also affect their findings.
Chapters 8 and 9 have focused on trade, but the relationship between trade
and investment is extremely close; for example, PTAs affect regional production,
intraindustry specialization, and the location of firms. A former WTO director-general
notes that “businesses now trade to invest and invest to trade—t o the point where
both activities are increasingly part of a single strategy to deliver products across
borders.”109 The next chapter deals with the issue of MNCs and foreign investment.
QUESTIONS
1 What are the differences between an FTA, CU, common market, and economic
union? Do any PTAs fit completely within one of these models of integration? Why
do you think it is often difficult for trading partners to increase their level of inte-
gration? Consider the challenges of each step.
2 How do neomercantilists, liberals, and Marxists explain the rise and consequences
of regional integration?
3 In what ways can PTAs be trade- diverting and trade- creating? Do you think that
PTAs are stepping stones or obstacles to global trade liberalization, and why do you
think liberal theorists cannot agree on this issue?
4 What conditions does GATT Article 24 impose on PTAs? How successful has the
GATT/ WTO been in regulating PTAs?
5 In what ways do LDCs receive special treatment as members and associate members
of PTAs? Does Mexico receive special treatment in NAFTA?

9 PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 297
6 In what ways is the EU a unique PTA? What are the neofunctionalist, liberal
intergovernmentalist, constructivist, and postfunctionalist theoretical approaches
to economic integration, and why are they applied mainly to Europe? What is plu-
tocratic theory (or plutocracy), and how does it differ from the major theoretical
approaches to European integration?
7 What are the major changes to NAFTA under the new USMCA? What is the
reasoning behind them and whom do they benefit?
8 What was the TPP and what were the factors in its demise? Why did the CPTPP
replace it? Consider applying the two- level game framework discussed in Chapter 4
in your analysis.
KEY TERMS
Association of Southeast European Coal and Steel Organisation for
Asian Nations Community (ECSC) European Economic
Brexit European Co-operation
Canada–U.S. Free Community (EC) (OEEC)
Trade Agreement European Free Trade plutocracy
(CUSFTA) Association (EFTA) political union
common market European Union (EU) postfunctionalism
Comprehensive and free trade area (FTA) preferential trade
Progressive Trans- GATT Article 24 agreements (PTAs)
Pacific Partnership liberal rules of origin
(CPTPP) intergovernmentalism Schengen Agreement
Cotonou Agreement Lomé Convention Trans- Pacific
customs union (CU) Maastricht Treaty Partnership (TPP)
economic and monetary Mercosur U.S.– Mexico– Canada
union (EMU) neofunctionalism Trade Agreement
economic union North American Free (USMCA)
Eurasian Economic Trade Agreement
Union (NAFTA)
NOTES
1 WTO, World Trade Report— 2011 (Geneva: WTO, 2011), p. 58; Matthias Middell,
“Transregional Studies: A New Approach to Global Processes,” in Matthias Middell,
ed., The Routledge Handbook of Transregional Studies (New York: Routledge,
2019), p. 10.
2 Pravin Krishna, “Preferential Trade Agreements and the World Trade System,” in
Robert C. Feenstra and Alan M. Taylor, eds., Globalization in an Age of Crisis
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014), p. 135.
3 Jagdish Bhagwati, Termites in the Trading System: How Preferential Agreements
Undermine Free Trade (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008), p. 88.
4 Jo- Ann Crawford and Robert V. Fiorentino, “The Changing Landscape of
Regional Trade Agreements,” Discussion Paper 8 (Geneva: WTO Secretariat
Staff, 2005), p. 1.
5 Gerald K. Helleiner, “Considering U.S.–M exico Free Trade,” in Ricardo Grinspun
and Maxwell A. Cameron, eds., The Political Economy of North American Free
Trade (Montreal: McGill- Queen’s University Press, 1993), pp. 50–5 1.

